This file contains the license information for the project. Several parts of the project are licensed under different licenses, so it is important to read this file to understand the terms of use for the project.

In general the intent is to make the project as open as possible, so that you can use it in your projects (including commercial projects) without any restrictions. The code generator itself is licensed under GPLv3 to ensure that the code generator itself remains open source. The code generated by the code generator is not subject to this license, so you can use it in any way you like. All support libraries are licensed under the Apache 2.0 license, which is a permissive open source license. Examples are licensed under the MIT license, which is also a permissive open source license.

Here is a list of the different parts of the project and their licenses:

- `examples`: all examples are licensed under the MIT license.
- `quarkus-kotlin-openapi`: this is a support library which is licensed under the Apache 2.0 license, same as Quarkus.
- `quarkus-kotlin-openapi-extension`: another support library with additional extensions for UUID, dates, times, etc. It is also licensed under the Apache 2.0 license, same as Quarkus.
- `quarkus-kotlin-openapi-maven-plugin`: this is the actual code generator. It is licensed under GPLv3. The code generated by this plugin is not subject to this license, e.g. any code you generate with this plugin can be freely used and distributed under any license you choose. 
- `quarkus-kotlin-openapi-test`: this is a test project for testing the correctness of the code generator. You will usually not interact with this project at all. It is also licensed under GPLv3.

