README.md, before:

# Quarkus Kotlin OpenAPI

Quarkus Kotlin OpenAPI is a code generator that generates server and client Kotlin code from an OpenAPI specification. The generated code is intended to run with Quarkus, the framework for writing JVM-based applications.

## Features

- Generate type-safe, high-performance, fully reactive server and client code in Kotlin from an OpenAPI specification with a focus on correctness and developer experience.
- Generate test clients for easy testing of your API implementation.
- Built-in support for patching third party OpenAPI specifications to your needs.
- Partial generation allows you to generate only the parts of the API you need for your application.
- Customizable validation, type mapping and error handling.
- Generated code does not rely on reflection which improves performance and allows the use of native image compilation with GraalVM without any additional configuration.

## Getting started

Please visit the [documentation](https://derkork.github.io/quarkus-kotlin-openapi/) website for more information on how to get started.



&copy; 2024 Ancient Light Studios GbR

Commit message:

new code generator implementation
* chore: renaming stuff

* chore: renaming stuff

* feat: response interfaces

* feat: schema to model conversion

* feat: more emitter

* feat: more emitter

* feat: more emitter

* feat: more emitter

* feat: more tests
chore: change tests to match to the new implementation (mainly some optional values are transformed into non-nullable values with a default)
feat: more emitter

* feat: finish code refactoring

* chore: todo items

* chore: rename dependencyVogel to dependencyContainer

* chore: update documentation

* chore: update documentation

* fix: workflow pipeline

* fix: workflow pipeline

README.md, after:

# Quarkus Kotlin OpenAPI

Quarkus Kotlin OpenAPI is a code generator that generates server and client Kotlin code from an OpenAPI specification. The generated code is intended to run with Quarkus, the framework for writing JVM-based applications.

**This documentation is still in development and does not cover every feature of the code generator yet.**

## Features

- Generate type-safe, high-performance, fully reactive server and client code in Kotlin from an OpenAPI specification with a focus on correctness and developer experience.
- Generate test clients for easy testing of your API implementation.
- Built-in support for patching third party OpenAPI specifications to your needs.
- Partial generation allows you to generate only the parts of the API you need for your application.
- Customizable validation, type mapping and error handling.
- Generated code does not rely on reflection which improves performance and allows the use of native image compilation with GraalVM without any additional configuration.

## Getting started

Please visit the [documentation](https://derkork.github.io/quarkus-kotlin-openapi/) website for more information on how to get started.

&copy; 2024 Ancient Light Studios GbR
